Re-integrate Smepmp (#1879)
riscv/riscv-isa-manual: src/smepmp.adoc

== "Smepmp" Extension for PMP Enhancements for memory access and execution prevention in Machine mode, Version 1.0
=== Introduction

> The Smepmp extension enhances the xref:pmp[xrefstyle=basic] mechanism to improve Machine mode's security, by providing stronger memory isolation and privilege separation. It enables preventing the execution of code from memory regions not explicitly marked as executable by Machine mode, and restricts Machine mode's access to memory regions designated for Supervisor and User modes. These capabilities help to mitigate control-flow subversion attacks that exploit execution of unauthorized code with Machine mode privileges, and provide security guarantees consistent with the mechanism described in <<sum>> for memory access and execution prevention between Supervisor and User mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Smepmp extension enhances the xref:pmp[xrefstyle=basic] mechanism to improve Machine mode's security by providing stronger memory isolation and privilege separation. It allows preventing the execution of code from memory regions not explicitly marked as executable by Machine mode, and restricts Machine mode's access to memory regions designated for Supervisor and User modes. These capabilities help to mitigate control-flow subversion attacks that exploit execution of unauthorized code with Machine mode privileges, and provide security guarantees consistent with the mechanism described in <<sum>> for memory access and execution prevention between Supervisor and User mode.
```

Tbh I think the old text was a lot clearer. I would just change the second paragraph to

> To prevent this attack vector, two mechanisms known as Supervisor Memory Access Prevention (SMAP) and Supervisor Memory Execution Prevention (SMEP) can be used. The first one prevents the OS from accessing the memory of an unprivileged process unless a specific code path is followed, and the second one prevents the OS from executing the memory of an unprivileged process at all times. RISC-V includes support for SMAP, through the ``sstatus.SUM`` bit, and for SMEP by always denying execution of virtual memory pages marked with the U bit, with Supervisor mode (OS) privileges, as mandated on the Privilege Spec. This extension adds support for similar mechanisms for Machine mode.

Reviewer: I can't agree - understanding why it's requires helps enormously in understanding what it does. Having to dig through old proposals, Github PRs and so on to find out the motivation for bits of spec is not pleasant. Buuut... I'm not going to bang on about it. :-)

Reviewer: (Oh I was going to resolve this thread but I don't have permission, sorry.)

Reviewer: Yeah I think that would make a lot of sense. Probably there should be a "Programmers Guide" which has that info and also tells you how to write code for RISC-V. There are a few snippets of information for that through the spec (e.g. how to do CAS) but it seems like mostly you'd end up reading Linux/GCC source code if you want those details.

Good luck writing that though - it would be an enormous undertaking!

> Additionally this extension also provides a set of mechanisms to allow for more flexible and efficient use of the PMP configuration registers, especially during early boot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally this extension provides a set of mechanisms which allow a more flexible and efficient use of the PMP configuration registers, especially during early boot.
```

* *Denied*:	Any permissions set by a matching PMP rule are ignored, and _no_ accesses to the requested address range are allowed.; failures will cause an access-fault exception.
* *Locked*: A PMP rule/entry where the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit is set.
* *PMP reset*: A reset process where all PMP settings of the hart, including locked rules/settings, are re-initialized to a set of safe defaults, before releasing the hart (back) to the firmware / OS / application.
====

==== Threat model

However, there are no such mechanisms available on Machine mode in the current (v1.11) Privileged Spec. It is not possible for a PMP rule to be *enforced* only on non-Machine modes and *denied* on Machine mode, to only allow access to a memory region by less-privileged modes. it is only possible to have a *locked* rule that will be *enforced* on all modes, or a rule that will be *enforced* on non-Machine modes and be *ignored* by Machine mode. So for any physical memory region which is not protected with a Locked rule, Machine mode has unlimited access, including the ability to execute it.

> Without being able to protect less-privileged modes from Machine mode, it is not possible to prevent the mentioned attack vector. This becomes even more important for RISC-V than on other architectures, since implementations are allowed where a hart only has Machine and User modes available, so the whole OS will run on Machine mode instead of the non-existent Supervisor mode. In such implementations the attack surface is greatly increased, and the same kind of attacks performed on Supervisor mode and mitigated through SMAP/SMEP, can be performed on Machine mode without any available mitigations. Even on implementations with Supervisor mode present attacks are still possible against the Firmware and/or the Secure Monitor running on Machine mode.

Reviewer: This is all useful text! I don't think it should be deleted; just reworded.

Reviewer 3: imo this is all redundant. it reads like a textbook, not an ISA standard

Reviewer: I don't see why an ISA standard shouldn't have some motivation. There are plenty of notes already in the specification that aren't normative.

It could be condensed though for sure. I think it's at least worth mentioning that this is most useful for M/U machines where supervisor protection mechanisms cannot be used.

Author: Protecting Machine mode is always relevant, in any implementation scenario. What we said in the original document was that on systems where the OS runs on Machine mode, the attack surface is greatly increased, not because you don't have S-mode protections in-between, but because you run more complex code on M-mode with a higher probability of a vulnerability being present there that would allow for the exploitation of memory accesses from M-mode to less privileged modes ( tricking M-mode to execute code from less privileged modes). So it's not that Smepmp is most useful for M/U machines, we make this clear in the original document, in the last sentence of the part you quoted "Even on implementations with Supervisor mode present attacks are still possible...". With CoVE for example coming up, where we are going to have more complex code running on M-mode, it makes perfect sense to have Smepmp available, OpenSBI (which targets systems with Supervisor mode available) already uses it.

In any case this further explains the "why" not the "what" or "how", IMHO it makes more sense to keep the extended version of the "why" part in the proposal document which is referenced in case anyone wants to dig deeper, than having it as part of the ISA manual. The short version is still there: "to improve Machine mode's security by providing stronger memory isolation and privilege separation". I agree non-normative text still makes sense which is why I added tips e.g. for "how" shared regions may be used, or "why" the last two restrictions were added to MML, I think it's cleaner to have short tips than whole paragraphs.

[[proposal]]
=== Proposal

> . *Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg)* is a new RW Machine mode CSR, used for configuring various security mechanisms present on the hart, and only accessible to Machine mode. It is 64 bits wide, and is at address *0x747 on RV64* and *0x747 (low 32bits), 0x757 (high 32bits) on RV32*. All mseccfg fields defined on this proposal are WARL, and the remaining bits are reserved for future standard use and should always read zero. The reset value of mseccfg is implementation-specific, otherwise if backwards compatibility is a requirement it should reset to zero on hard reset.

Reviewer: > All mseccfg fields defined on this proposal are WARL

This seems to have been lost.

> The ``mseccfg.MML`` bit fundamentally changes the interpretation of the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit defined in <<pmp-locking>>. It is a sticky bit: once set, it cannot be unset until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``mseccfg.MML`` bit changes the interpretation of the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit defined in <<pmp-locking>>. It is a sticky bit: once set, it cannot be unset until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].
```

[[smepmp-mml]]
=== Machine Mode Lockdown (MML)

The ``mseccfg.MML`` bit fundamentally changes the interpretation of the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit defined in <<pmp-locking>>. It is a sticky bit: once set, it cannot be unset until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].

.. Adding a rule with executable privileges that either is *M-mode-only* or a *locked* *Shared-Region* is not possible and such ``pmpcfg`` writes are ignored, leaving ``pmpcfg`` unchanged. This restriction can be temporarily lifted by setting ``mseccfg.RLB`` e.g. during the boot process.
* When ``mseccfg.MML=0``, PMP operates according to the original specification, where the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit marks a rule as *Locked* and applicable in all privilege modes.

.. Executing code with Machine mode privileges is only possible from memory regions with a matching *M-mode-only* rule or a *locked* *Shared-Region* rule with executable privileges. Executing code from a region without a matching rule or with a matching _S/U-mode-only_ rule is *denied*.
* When ``mseccfg.MML=1``, the semantics of PMP rules change as follows:

> .. If ``mseccfg.MML`` is not set, the combination of ``pmpcfg.RW=01`` remains reserved for future standard use.

Reviewer: Has this been lost?

Author: It seemed redundant, we only override this when MML is set, didn't make much sense to say that when MML is not set, those bits remain reserved. It's also clean from the visual representation, but if you think it's worth re-adding it, I'm ok with it.

> ** ``pmpcfg.L`` denotes an M-mode-only rule when set (applies only to accesses from M-mode), or an S/U-mode-only rule when clear (applies only to accesses from S/U-mode). When ``pmpcfg.L`` is set the rule is also *Locked*, unless ``mseccfg.RLB`` is also set.

Reviewer 2: IMO the text already states that the rules are privilege level specific. I don't think the parentheticals are needed.

```suggestion
** ``pmpcfg.L`` denotes an M-mode-only rule when set, or an S/U-mode-only rule when clear. When ``pmpcfg.L`` is set the rule is also *Locked*, unless ``mseccfg.RLB`` is also set.
```

> ** The formerly reserved encoding `pmpcfg.RW=01` (with various `pmpcfg.L` and `pmpcfg.X` settings) now encodes Shared-Region rules (that apply to accesses from all privilege modes) with varying permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** The formerly reserved encoding `pmpcfg.RW=01` (with various `pmpcfg.L` and `pmpcfg.X` settings) now encodes Shared-Region rules with varying permissions, applied to all privilege modes accesses.
```

==== Visual representation of the proposal

image::smepmp-visual-representation.png[]
[TIP]
====
Shared data regions may be used to expose static platform-specific information (e.g. ACPI tables or the device tree), used by both Machine and Supervisor modes, or exchange data between them without the overhead of copying them.

=== Smepmp software discovery
Shared code regions may be used for exposing vendor-specific functionality (e.g. with custom instructions) to Supervisor/User modes, without exposing that code, or risking the posibility of modifications (no write access).
====

Since all fields defined on ``mseccfg`` as part of this proposal are locked when set (``MMWP``/``MML``) or locked when cleared (``RLB``), software can't poll them for determining the presence of Smepmp. It is expected that BootROM will set ``mseccfg.MMWP`` and/or ``mseccfg.MML`` during early boot, before jumping to the firmware, so that the firmware will be able to determine the presence of Smepmp by reading ``mseccfg`` and checking the state of ``mseccfg.MMWP`` and ``mseccfg.MML``.
Additionally, when `mseccfg.MML=1`:

[[rationale]]

> === Rationale

Reviewer: Feels like a shame to lose all this information too.

Author: I think the important stuff is still there, some as part of the implementation considerations, some as tips/info, and the most important part regarding rlb is mentioned twice. It seems inconsistent with the rest of the document to keep this, it's a bit too much to e.g. explain why we didn't say anything about mprv, or what was our thought process etc. The document is still there for people to dig deeper, it doesn't have to be included in the privilege spec. The chapter was 7 pages long, it's now 4 pages long and still contains what's needed for someone to implement this.

> The ``msec.MMAP`` bit changes the default PMP policy for Machine mode when accessing memory regions that don't have a matching PMP rule. It is a sticky bit: once set, it cannot be unset until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``msec.MMAP`` bit changes the default PMP policy for Machine-mode when accessing memory regions that don't have a matching PMP rule. It is a sticky bit: once set, it cannot be unset until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].
```

> * When mseccfg.MMAP=0, Machine mode can access memory regions without a matching PMP rule (default behavior).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When mseccfg.MMAP=0, Machine-mode can access memory regions without a matching PMP rule (default behavior).
```

[TIP]
====

> This mechanism not only provides a more strict access policy for Machine mode which otherwise has access everywhere unless restricted, it also allows for more efficient use of the available PMP registers, since there is no need to waste a rule for every region that should be blocked such as regions used by peripherals / processors on the system, or e.g. the BootROM after the handoff to firmware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This mechanism not only provides a more strict access policy for Machine-mode which otherwise has access everywhere unless restricted, it also allows for more efficient use of the available PMP registers, since there is no need to waste a rule for every region that should be blocked such as regions used by peripherals / processors on the system, or e.g. the BootROM after the handoff to firmware.
```

====

=== Rule Locking Bypass (RLB)

The ``mseccfg.RLB`` bit provides a mechanism to temporarily modify Locked PMP rules:

> * When mseccfg.RLB=1, Locked PMP rules may be modified and locked PMP entries may be edited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When mseccfg.RLB=1 *locked* PMP rules may be modified and *locked* PMP entries may be edited.
```

* When mseccfg.RLB=0 and pmpcfg.L=1 in any rule or entry (including disabled entries), then mseccfg.RLB remains 0 and any further modifications to mseccfg.RLB are ignored until xref:reset[xrefstyle=basic].

[CAUTION]
====
*Be aware that RLB introduces a security vulnerability if left set after the boot process is over and in general it should be used with caution, even when used temporarily.* This feature is intended to be used as a debug mechanism, or as a temporary workaround during the boot process for simplifying software, and optimizing the allocation of memory and PMP rules. If developers / vendors have no use for such functionality, they should never set ``mseccfg.RLB`` and if possible hard-wire it to 0. In any case *RLB should be disabled and locked as soon as possible*.
====

[NOTE]
====
If ``mseccfg.RLB`` is not used and left unset, it will be locked as soon as a PMP rule/entry with the ``pmpcfg.L`` bit set is configured.
====

=== Smepmp software discovery

> Since all fields defined on ``mseccfg`` under this proposal are either locked when set (``MMAP``/``MML``) or locked when cleared (``RLB``), software cannot dynamically query them to determine the presence of Smepmp. It is expected that BootROM will set ``mseccfg.MMAP`` and/or ``mseccfg.MML`` during early boot, before transferring control to the firmware. The firmware can then determine the presence of Smepmp by reading ``mseccfg`` and verifying the state of ``mseccfg.MMAP`` and ``mseccfg.MML``. Alternatively a software-defined discovery mechanism may be used.

Reviewer: BootROM -> "the firmware"?

Author: "BootROM, ...during early boot, before transferring control to the firmware" The idea here is that the BootROM is implementation-specific, while the firmware as a software component may be more implementation-agnostic, such as OpenSBI for example or another third-party firmware (it makes perfect sense to have a reference firmware implementation like OpenSBI, that we can maintain/verify etc, and use that in most situations).

Reviewer: Right I just mean the term "BootROM" isn't defined anywhere (or used anywhere else). There's only one other instance of "firmware" too, which also doesn't have a definition.

I think the implicit use of firmware (based on the SBI specs) is pretty much "code running in M mode". Maybe something like this makes more sense:

> It is expected that implementation-specific boot code will set ... before transferring control to an SBI implementation.
